\section{Estrogen signaling}

Estrogen signaling plays a pivotal role in the development and progression of
breast cancer, particularly in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) subtypes. The
primary mechanism of action involves the binding of estrogen to estrogen
receptors (ER$\alpha$ and ER$\beta$), which are transcription factors that
regulate gene expression associated with cell proliferation, differentiation,
and survival \supercite{misawa_estrogen-related_2015,lattouf_lkb1_2016}. The
activation of these receptors can lead to the transcription of genes that
promote tumor growth and metastasis, thereby establishing a direct link between
estrogen signaling and breast cancer pathogenesis
\supercite{feng_cross-talk_2020}.

In ER+ breast cancer, estrogen signaling is often enhanced through various
intracellular signaling pathways, including the phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways. These pathways
can be activated by growth factors such as HER2, which is frequently
overexpressed in aggressive breast
cancers\supercite{bratton_regulation_2010,salmeron-hernandez_bcas2_2019}. The
crosstalk between estrogen signaling and these pathways not only amplifies the
proliferative effects of estrogen but also contributes to the survival of cancer
cells under therapeutic stress, such as
chemotherapy\supercite{bratton_regulation_2010,george_hypoxia_2012}. For
instance, the interaction between ER$\alpha$ and the PI3K/AKT pathway has been
shown to suppress apoptosis and promote cell survival, which is critical for
tumor progression\supercite{bratton_regulation_2010,george_hypoxia_2012}.

Moreover, the role of alternative estrogen receptors, such as ER-$\alpha$36, has
emerged as a significant factor in breast cancer biology. ER-$\alpha$36 is a
variant of the classical ER$\alpha$ that mediates rapid, non-genomic signaling
responses to estrogen, influencing cell proliferation and survival in both ER+
and ER-negative breast cancer
cells\supercite{deng_er-36-mediated_2014,zhang_positive_2011}. This receptor's
activation can lead to enhanced sensitivity to estrogen, even in cells that
typically do not express classical estrogen receptors, thus complicating
treatment strategies\supercite{zhang_positive_2011}.

The influence of estrogen on breast cancer is further complicated by the
presence of co-regulators and other signaling molecules. For example, the
protein CAND1 has been implicated in the regulation of estrogen signaling
pathways, suggesting that it may play a role in metastasis in ER+ breast
cancer\supercite{alhammad_bioinformatics_2022}. Additionally, the interaction of
estrogen with various growth factor signaling pathways can lead to the
upregulation of genes associated with cancer stem cell properties, thereby
promoting tumor heterogeneity and resistance to
therapies\supercite{fillmore_estrogen_2010,xue_sox9fxyd3src_2019}.

